Xenial docs (#2108)
travis-ci/docs-travis-ci-com: user/reference/xenial.md

---
title: The Xenial Build Environment
layout: en
---

## What This Guide Covers

On this page, you can find what is included on the Xenial build environment.

## Using Xenial
The following configuration will get your builds to run on a Xenial image:

```yaml
dist: xenial
```
{: data-file=".travis.yml"}

> Please note that this image will only be available on the sudo-enabled

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please note that Xenial is available on our fully virtualized
```

> infrastructure. If you are running an Enterprise installation, you can use the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
infrastructure. If you are running an Enterprise installation, please reach out
```

> Xenial Docker images.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to [enterprise@travis-ci.com](mailto:entereprise@travis-ci.com) to see how you can use the Xenial Docker images.
```

## Image differences from Trusty

> Apart from version bumps of software, and new defaults for language

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Xenial includes the following changes and improvements: 
```

> environment, the Xenial image contains the following changes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> ### Non-core apt-repositories removed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Third party apt-repositories removed
```

> On Trusty, apt repositories that have been used to install images have been

Reviewer 2: "install images" → "install packages"

> On Trusty, apt repositories that have been used to install images have been

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On Trusty, apt repositories that have been used to install packages have been
```

removed after installation. Intent is to speed up runs of `apt-get update`. In
case an apt repository is missing, you can [add the source with the apt addon](/user/installing-dependencies/#adding-apt-sources). For
example:

```yaml
dist: xenial
addons:
  apt:
    sources:
      - ppa:chris-lea/redis-server
```
{: data-file=".travis.yml"}

Packages from the following repositories are available, even if the source is
not:

| package       | source                     |
+---------------+----------------------------+
| redis         | ppa:chris-lea/redis-server |
| haskell       | ppa:hvr/ghc                |
| mongodb       | "deb http://repo.mongodb.org/apt/ubuntu xenial/mogodb-org/4.0 multiverse" |
| couchdb       | ppa:couchdb/stable         |
| docker        | "deb [arch=amd64] https://download.docker.com/linux/ubuntu xenial stable" |
| git-lfs       | "deb https://packagecloud.io/github/git-lfs/ubuntu/ xenial main" |
| git-ppa       | ppa:git-core/ppa           |
| google_chrome | "deb [arch=amd64] http://dl.google.com/linux/chrome/deb/ stable main" |
| pollinate     | ppa:pollinate/ppa          |

### Services disabled by default

> On Trusty, some services that you might or might not use, were running by

Reviewer 2: "were" → "are" We still support Trusty, so let's use the present tense.

---
title: The Xenial Build Environment
layout: en
---

## What This Guide Covers

> On this page, you can find what is included on the Xenial build environment.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This guide provides an overview of the packages, tools and settings available in the Xenial environment.
```

## Using Xenial

> To get your builds using Ubuntu Xenial 16.04, add the following to your `.travis.yml`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To route your builds to Ubuntu Xenial 16.04, add the following to your `.travis.yml`:
```

```yaml
dist: xenial
```
{: data-file=".travis.yml"}

Please note that Xenial is available on our fully virtualized

> infrastructure. If you are running an Enterprise installation, please reach out

Reviewer 3: As that is now (ish) our only, do we can to say "hosted" or something?

> to [enterprise@travis-ci.com](mailto:entereprise@travis-ci.com) to see how you can use the Xenial Docker images.

Reviewer 3: We should probably add a subject to this?

> ## Image updates from Trusty

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Differences from our Trusty Infrastructure
```

Xenial includes the following changes and improvements:

### Third party apt-repositories removed

While third party apt-repositories are used during the Xenial image provisioning, they are all removed from the Xenial build image. This has two benefits; a) reduced risk of unrelated interference and b) faster apt-get updates.

> To specify a third party apt-repository, you can [add the source with the apt addon](/user/installing-dependencies/#adding-apt-sources) and specify the packages. For example:

Reviewer 3: Do you need to add both? I think not. You could add just the source? Or the source and the package? We could maybe head off some confusion here.

| package       | source                                                                      |
|:--------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| redis         | `ppa:chris-lea/redis-server`                                                |
| haskell       | `ppa:hvr/ghc`                                                               |
| mongodb       | `"deb http://repo.mongodb.org/apt/ubuntu xenial/mogodb-org/4.0 multiverse"` |
| couchdb       | `ppa:couchdb/stable`                                                        |
| docker        | `"deb [arch=amd64] https://download.docker.com/linux/ubuntu xenial stable"` |
| git-lfs       | `"deb https://packagecloud.io/github/git-lfs/ubuntu/ xenial main"`          |
| git-ppa       | `ppa:git-core/ppa`                                                          |
| google_chrome | `"deb [arch=amd64] http://dl.google.com/linux/chrome/deb/ stable main"`     |
| pollinate     | `ppa:pollinate/ppa`                                                         |

### Services disabled by default

On Trusty, some services that you might or might not use, were running by

> default. On Xenial, to optimize the use of the virtual machine resources, they come disabled by default.

Reviewer 3: What about replacing all of this with

```suggestion
On our Xenial infrastructure, to speed up boot time and improve performance we've disabled all services, including the ones that were started by default on Trusty. Add any services that you want to start by default to your `.travis.yml`:

You can start them by specifying the services that you require. For example:

```yaml
services:
  - mysql
  - redis
```
{: data-file=".travis.yml"}

## Environment common to all Xenial images

> In total, three different Xenial images are available for use. The selection

Reviewer 3: These paragraphs are well confusing, and we don't mention `steveonnie` anywyere else. I'd b tempted to either delete all of these paragraphs up to the common environment, or copy some of text from Ubuntu about Minimal and Generic.

WDYT?

process takes place based on the language and services specified in your `travis.yml` configuration.

The minimal image `stevonnie` supports docker, bash, and has the tools for dynamic language runtime download and activation, for example, `rvm` for ruby.

The other two images have different language runtimes installed by default, and
have an array of different databases and services available.

You can find below the environment common to all Xenial images. The environment specifications below are also the ones for our `language: minimal` Xenial image.

### Version control

| package | version  |
|:--------|:---------|
| git     | `2.19.1` |
| git-lfs | `2.6.0`  |
| hg      | `4.8`    |
| svn     | `1.9.3`  |
{: style="width: 50%" } 

### Compilers and Build toolchain

* clang and llvm 7 are installed.
* cmake 3.12.4 is available. The gcc toolchain is available from the Ubuntu
repositories.

### Docker

* Docker 18.06.0-ce is installed
* docker-compose 1.23.1.

## Ruby images

> * Pre-installed Rubies: `2.4.5` and `2.5.3`.

Reviewer 3: What we could do is add a line for each language here about what base image is uses?

* Other ruby versions can be installed during build time.

## Python images

* Pre-installed Python versions: `2.7.15`, `3.6.5`, and `3.7.1`.

* Python `2.7.15` will be used when no language version is explicitly set.

## JavaScript and Node.js images

* The newest nvm is available to all images. (FIX: is there a version we can use here?)

* Pre-installed NodeJS versions: `11.0.0` and `8.12.0`.

## Go images

> * * Pre-installed Go: `1.11.1`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Pre-installed Go: `1.11.1`
```

> * * Other ruby versions can be installed during build time by specifying the language versions with the `go:`-key.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Other ruby versions can be installed during build time by specifying the language versions with the `go:`-key.
```

## JVM (Clojure, Groovy, Java, Scala) images

* Pre-installed JVMs: `openjdk10`, and `openjdk11`.

* Other JDKs, including Oracle's, can be acquired if available by specifying `jdk`.

* The following table summarizes the Pre-installed JVM tooling versions:

| package | version |
|:--------|:--------|
| gradle  | 4.10.2  |
| maven   | 3.5.4   |

## Databases and services

> * Pre-installed Databases and services:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Pre-installed Databases and services:
```

Reviewer 3: And maybe a reminder here that you need to start them?

## Environment common to all Xenial images

> As a technicallity, three different images have been created that all support a

Reviewer 3: This has the same issue of mentioning images but not really explaining them. What do you think of:

The following versions of Docker, version control software and compilers are present on all builds, along with more language specific software described in more detail in each language section.

* clang and llvm 7 are installed.
* cmake 3.12.4 is available. The gcc toolchain is available from the Ubuntu
repositories.
* gcc 5.4.0
* ccache 3.2.4
* shellcheck 0.5.0
* shfmt 2.4.0

### Docker

* Docker 18.06.0-ce is installed
* docker-compose 1.23.1.

## Ruby support

* Pre-installed Rubies: `2.4.5` and `2.5.3`.
* The default ruby is `2.5.3p105`.
* Other ruby versions can be installed during build time.

## Python support

* Pre-installed Python versions: `2.7.15`, `3.6.5`, and `3.7.1`.

* Python `2.7.15` will be used when no language version is explicitly set.

## JavaScript and Node.js support

> * For builds specifying `language: node_js`, `nvm` is automatically updated to the latest version at build time. For other builds, the stable version at image build time has been selected, which is 0.33.11.

Reviewer 3: :+1:

| gradle  | 4.10.2  |
| maven   | 3.5.4   |

## PHP support
As always, `phpenv` is available for dynamic runtime selection. The following
PHPs are preinstalled:

| alias | version |
|:------|:--------|
| 5.6   | 5.6.36  |
| 7.1   | 7.1.19  |
| 7.2   | 7.2.7   |

## Databases and services

> Pre-installed Databases and services are:

Reviewer 3: How about being more explicit here.

The following services and databases are preinstalled but but do not run by default. To use any of them, add it to the `services` key in your `travis.yml`:

Which also gets rid o ftext before _and_ after the table
